marconi Query interface ADR PLT-607 (#763)
input-output-hk/plutus-apps: doc/adr/0013-marconi-query-interface.rst

.. _marconi_indexer:

ADR 13: Marconi Query Interface
======================================================

Date: 2022-10-27

Author(s)
---------

Kayvan Kazeminejad <kayvan.kazeminejad@iohk.io>

Status
------

Draft

Context

> -------

Reviewer: Missing line break.

> Marconi Query Interface is both an executable and a Haskell library built on top of `marconi`.  In its current alpha version, the interface provides a reporting capability for a bounded list of `Bech32 Shelley Era addresses <https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-0019#shelley-addresses>`_ and their corresponding `UTXO` `TxOutRef`.  The executable package provides for an HTTP `JSON-RPC 2.0 <https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification>`_ on top of the marconi Haskell libraries.

Reviewer 2: I think "Marconi" should generally be capitalized unless maybe you're referring to a folder named "marconi". But in terms of referring to the name of the project, I recommend "Marconi" in general.

> Scope

Reviewer: I would change this to "Affected Artifacts" and move it at the bottom of the doc.

-------

> The scope of this document is the marcoin query interface executable package built on top:

Reviewer 2: Typo: marcoin -> marconi

- `marconi`
- `marconi-query`
- JSON-RPC 2.0
- HTTP

Caution
^^^^^^

> This is a living document as the interface is under development

Reviewer 2: Add a period at the end of the sentence.

Decision
--------

> After soliciting a number of potential clients, we made the following architectural decisions:

Reviewer 2: I suggest: 
After soliciting feedback from a number of ... 

Or maybe instead of "feedback" you may prefer "input" depending on what is most accurate.

* Minimize changes to the marconi back-end

> * JSON-RPC 2.0 for non-Haskell users

Reviewer: This should be restructured using active voice.
Ex.
* we will minimize changes...
* we will use JSON-RPC 2.0 ...

* Bech32 Shelley Era addresses are provided through CLI
* The alpha release will scope to reporting on `TxOutRef` of `UTXO`s only

> These decision were an architectural compromise with the following  cons and pros:

Reviewer 2: I suggest making "decision" plural and you may as well say "pros and cons" in that order since that's the order you're using below. 

"These decisions were an architectural compromise with the following pros and cons:"

**Pros:**

> - Provide the most valued functionality first and fast

Reviewer 2: Suggest: 

- Promptly provide the most valued functionality first

- Iterate quickly to provide more functionality

> - Built on top of existing marconi code base with no or minimal impact to marconi for speed delivery

Reviewer 2: Suggest these small edits: 

- Built on top of existing Marconi code base with no or minimal impact on Marconi for quick delivery

- Reusability of existing `JSON` encoder/decoder for all entities of interest
- Reasonable real-time query response time for the HTTP JSON-RPC service

> **Cons:**

Reviewer 3: I think that none of the Cons are actually about the query interface, so I am thinking we can take them out?

> - `SQLite` will remain as marconi back-end database

Reviewer 2: Capitalize "Marconi"

- Alpha version **will not** provide:
  - Streaming services
  - Notification services

> - Shelley Era addresses only

Reviewer: Pros and cons should be part of the "Argument" section of the ADR (right after "Decisions")

Implications

> ^^^^^^

Reviewer: In RST, you need to add enough "^" to cover the title.

Something like:
```
Implications
^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> A critical consequence of these compromises in the alpha version is that the query interface must be the sole owner of the SQLite `utxos` database. Any other connection to this SQLite database will result in undefined behavior of the software due to the concurrency nature of SQLite internals.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A critical consequence of these compromises in the alpha version is that the query interface must be the sole owner of the SQLite `utxos` database. Any other connection to this SQLite database will result in undefined behavior of the software due to the way SQLite handles concurrent access to the database..
```

Author: I omitted this section in favor of adding it to the README

> A critical consequence of these compromises in the alpha version, is that the query interface must be the sole owner of the SQLite `utxos` database. Any other connection to this SQLite database will result in undefined behavior of the software due to the concurrency nature of SQLite internals.

Reviewer 2: Suggest removing the comma in first sentence: 

"...in the alpha version is that the query..."

Reports
------------

> From a birds eye view, the query interface is a reporting capability for the indexed portion of the blockchain.  Our initial solution with the alpha version, provides for reports on the `TxOutRef` of a given address.

Reviewer 2: "birds eye" in this context should be "bird's-eye" 

Also I suggest using the word "provides" instead of "is" here: 

"From a bird's-eye view, the query interface provides a reporting capability..."

You don't need the comma in the second sentence: 

"Our initial solution with the alpha version provides for..."

Report Request
^^^^^^

A sample JSON-RPC report request using `REST-Client <https://github.com/pashky/restclient.el>`_:

.. code-block:: json

    POST http://localhost:3000/json-rpc
    Content-Type: application/json
    {
    "jsonrpc": "2.0"
    , "method": "txOutRef"
    , "params": "addr1vpu5vlrf4xkxv2qpwngf6cjhtw542ayty80v8dyr49rf5eg0yu80w"
    , "id": 11
    }

Report Request
^^^^^^

.. code-block:: json

    {
      "id": 11,
      "jsonrpc": "2.0",
      "result": [
        {
          "txOutRefId": {
            "getTxId": "083c8678ccebc23d59b315441b37328335c1fc680e2c9f809fac60928fe8cf79"
          },
          "txOutRefIdx": 0
        },
        {
          "txOutRefId": {
            "getTxId": "083c8678ccebc23d59b315441b37328335c1fc680e2c9f809fac60928fe8cf79"
          },
          "txOutRefIdx": 1
        }
      ]
    }
    // POST http://localhost:3000/json-rpc
    // HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    // Transfer-Encoding: chunked
    // Date: Mon, 17 Oct 2022 23:57:50 GMT
    // Server: Warp/3.3.20
    // Content-Type: application/json-rpc
    // Request duration: 0.041375s

Eye Candy
^^^^^^

> We have provided a sample JSON-RPC server/client as well as a REST-Client to prototype any cool ideas you might have.  See the `example` folder for more detail.

Reviewer 3: I think this could be replaced with a list of the executables and their purpose, maybe some command line examples.

Author: I omitted this section as it seem too specific to put in ADR. I plan on adding it to the README
